Hello everyone in this lesson we will finish up the Contact Us page by making two big improvements to
the contact form.
First we will learn how to save the submissions from the contact form into the Wordpress database.
So that way we can always view a copy of all visitors submissions from within our admin dashboard instead
of having to rely solely on the emails that get automatically sent to us.
And after that we will finish up the lesson by learning how to protect our contact form from spam bots.
Without further ado let's start with our first goal.
Let's learn how to save the contact form submissions into the Wordpress database.
OK so here I am on the home page of my web site and if I use the navigation menu to jump to the Contact
Us page.
Currently as of this moment if a visitor fills out this contact form and hits send.
Behind the scenes WordPress will send an email to the owner of this web site with all of the data that
the visitor input and that can be great.
We all know that email is very convenient but email is not perfect right.
Sometimes you might accidentally delete an email or your inbox might become super crowded and it can
become difficult to stay organized.
So our goal right now is to customize this contact form so that in addition to sending us an email it
also saves the users data into the Wordpress database so that way instead of relying 100 percent on
our email we can always just jump into the admin dashboard and see a convenient organized list of all
contact forms submissions.
Now out of the box Wordpress and the contact form 7 plug in.
Do not offer that functionality but surprise surprise plugins can save the day.
So lets go and install a plugin that will give us the exact behavior that we want.
So let's jump over to our admin dashboard from the sidebar let's click on plug ins.
We want to search for and install a new plug in.
So up here click on the Add New button.
Let's use this top right search field and I can tell you that the plugin we are looking for that will
allow us to save contact form submissions into the database.
The best plug in to get that job done is named flamingo.
So let's search for flow Mingo.
Here it is.
The first result it has over hundred thousand active installs and a solid four and a half star rating.
So let's go ahead and click the install Now button once that completes.
Then click activate and with that new plug in activated if we look in our left hand sidebar we see a
new item named flamingo.
Go ahead and click on Flamingo now.
In my opinion this screen is not very useful.
So this Flamingo address book screen lives up to its name and it simply shows you a list with people's
name and email address.
And these are all of the people that have either left a comment on our blog posts or have filled out
our contact form.
Again I don't find the screen to be particularly useful.
The real power of Flamengo is located on another screen.
So in the left hand side bar under the main Flamengo menu.
In addition the address book we also see a link named inbound messages and that screen is what makes
Flamengo so powerful.
So go ahead and click on inbound messages.
And from this screen at the moment we see no items found.
And that's because we haven't had any contact form submissions take place since we just installed this
Flamingo plug in.
So let's give the Flamingo plug in a test.
Let's jump over to the front end of our website and submit a test or sample contact form submission
so I will jump to the contact us page.
Scroll down.
Let me fill this form out.
Click send thank you for your message it has been sent.
But more importantly if we jump back to the admin dashboard and you can either refresh the screen or
to get to the screen in the first place under the Flamingo sidebar menu click on inbound messages.
And here we see that contact form submission that we just created.
Now behind the scenes I did just receive an e-mail with this information but like we mentioned earlier
e-mail isn't always the ideal solution.
So now we have another copy of that contact form submission right here so I can go ahead and click on
the subject line to view the full form submission.
And now we get all of the info.
So not only their name and email but we can see what they're interested in.
So graphic design and we can see their body message.
The sky is blue today.
Perfect.
And really that's all there is to the Flamingo plugin from this moment forward you will now always have
a universal convenient location to read and review all of your contact form submissions.
OK.
So we just completed our first goal for this lesson.
Now let's change gears and work on protecting our contact form from spam box.
Let me jump back to the front end of my web site so I can let you know what I'm talking about so I'm
sure you've seen this before.
You're on a Web site and you're trying to fill out a form and a lot of the fields look normal but then
you'll see a field where it asks you to solve a riddle or to type in a few words that look really distorted
and twisted up and hard to read.
The reason web sites make you fill out weird fields like that is to prove that you're not a robot to
prove that you're not a spam bot to prove that you're just an innocent human being trying to legitimately
use the form.
Those types of fields that present a riddle or some type of question are often referred to as a capture.
So our goal right now is to add a caption field to our contact form so that only humans and not spam
bots will be successful when they try to submit or send this contact form.
Now luckily for us the contact form seven plug in that we are using makes it very easy to implement
a capture field.
So check this out.
Back in our admin dashboard in the left hand side bar hover over the contact option and within the contact
menu that appears click on integration OK.
So here we see something called recaptcha recaptcha is one of the best spam bot protection captious
services in the world.
It's a free service created by Google and all we need to do is go to the Google recapture website and
sign up for a free account.
Actually we don't really need to sign up for anything because you can just log in with your existing
Google or gmail account and then you will be just one click away from using recaptcha.
OK so here's what you need to do.
Open a new tab in your web browser or a new window in your web browser and go to Google dot com.
And then I want you to search for Google recaptcha So Google recaptcha.
This should be the first or second result.
Basically we're just looking for Google dot com forward slash recaptcha.
So click on any link that begins with that you Arel and then we're going to click on this button towards
the top right that reads get recaptcha.
Now it's important to note that you do need a Google account in order to use recaptcha.
Most people already have a Google account.
So if you've ever used Gmail or YouTube or Google Drive or Google Docs you already have a Google account.
So just be sure that you're signed into your Google account in your web browser and then you'll be able
to follow along with these steps.
No problem.
OK so I'm currently signed into my Google account so I'm free to fill out this form.
So for the label it doesn't really matter we can type anything we want here.
I will just type the name of my website.
So learning WordPress.
And just to stay organized I will say contact form page again.
It doesn't really matter what we type here it's just for your own organization.
And then this field is important.
So in this field I want you to type in or copy and paste in the domain of your Wordpress Web site.
So let's use my web site as an example.
So back in this tab we can see that my web site lives at Bradd ass.
One dot S-G you remember I'm using site ground for my web site dot site.
Now the rest of this you Arel is just specific to the page I'm currently viewing.
Right so I'm in the Wordpress admin dashboard etc. etc. but that's not important.
Google just wants the domain name and only this beginning part is the domain.
So if you're like me and you're using site ground it will just be your name.
As GED you dot site or if you're using your own custom dot com or dot org.
We're just interested in the root domain of your web site so I'm going to copy this part of the RL into
my clipboard and then back in the Google recaptcha tab.
I will just paste that into this field and I'm actually going to remove the HTP colon slash slash at
the beginning and I will also remove the slash at the end.
OK so now it's literally just my domain and then go ahead and click this blue register button.
All right perfect.
Now from this screen.
We're interested in this area.
So here we have two things a site key and a secret key.
Now I've blacked out my keys just for security reasons.
But you will have your own unique key values here.
And now we just need to plug in these key values into the contact form plug in.
So right now within this first one the site key area within this box go ahead and select and copy your
site key value copy it in your clipboard and then jump back to the browser tab or window where you still
have the Wordpress admin dashboard open.
If you can't remember how I got to this current screen just look in your left hand side bar for contact
and within the contact sub menu click on integration.
OK and now that we've generated our own recaptcha keys we can just go ahead and click on this configure
key button.
Here we see two fields.
So the site key should already be in your clipboard.
Remember you just copied it.
So go ahead and paste that in.
And finally we just need to enter our secret key.
So jump back to the recaptcha tab and right here you should see your secret key value.
So select that and then copy it to your clipboard then jump back into the Wordpress screen and paste
it into the secret key field.
Once you've done that then click the save button.
All right and now we're just one step away from having the capture field appear on our contact form.
Our final step is to edit the contact form to the left hand side bar.
Click on the main top level contact button at the moment we only have the one form.
So go ahead and click on that.
Edit it and now within this area we just need to place our cursor where we want the caption field to
appear.
It's totally up to you but personally I'm going to add the caption in between the your message and the
final submit button.
So I will place my cursor right about here and now we can use these buttons up here and look for one
named recaptcha.
So here it is towards the right hand side.
Recaptcha go ahead and click on that within this pop up screen.
We can leave all of the options set to their default value and just go ahead and click this insert tag
button down here and really all that did was add a short code right here where cursor was named recaptcha.
So technically you couldn't just type that in by hand.
But either way with this in place let's go ahead and save our form.
So in the right hand sidebar click the blue save button and now if we jump back to the front end of
our Web site and refresh the contact us page we scroll down a bit here we see that caption field.
Now because I'm currently logged into my Google account in this web browser the Google recaptures service
already sort of trusts me.
So if I click this I'm not a robot link it gives me the green success checkmark and it sort of just
takes my word for it that I'm not a robot.
And again that's because I'm already signed into my Google account on this browser.
However what if a random stranger visits our Web site and tries to use our contact form.
So I'm currently using Google Chrome as my web browser.
But if I open up Mozilla Firefox.
So in this browser window I'm just a random stranger visiting this Web site and if I go to the contact
page and scroll down here we see the caption field.
Only this time if I click.
I'm not a robot.
The recaptures service is going to make me prove that I'm not a robot.
So here we see it gives us a little test or a quiz or a riddle that says Select all squares with street
signs.
So I will click this square in this square and then click next Caig then select all squares with street
So I will click here here here here here here you get the idea and then click verify.
Ok cool.
So I passed the test and now that I passed that test and Google recaptcha knows that I'm not a spam
bot.
I'm free to fill out this form and submit it.
But if someone comes to our website and tries to fill out the form before completing the recapture test
they will not be able to submit the form.
So let's try that really quick if I refresh this page and scroll down and if I purposely leave this
unchecked and I don't complete the quiz just fill this out subject test message test and I click send.
We see this error message.
Please verify that you are not a robot.
Perfect.
So we have successfully protected our contact form from evil spam robots.
And that's actually going to bring this lesson and this section on creating a contact page to a close
in our next lesson we will learn about some of the most important WordPress settings customizing WordPress
settings will let you create additional user accounts.
So in addition to your main admin account you could create additional accounts for friends or family
or coworkers so they can help you manage the Web site.
It should be a lot of fun.
Let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.